Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the antacids,
antisecretory drugs and prokinetics, used for aspiration prophylaxis.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to the drugs that modify gastric acidity and motility,
used for aspiration prophylaxis and reflux.
Begin with why this matters in anaesthesia.
It matters because the anaesthetised patient loses the protective airway reflexes,
so regurgitated gastric contents may be aspirated into the lungs,
causing aspiration pneumonitis — Mendelson's syndrome — a chemical injury whose
severity depends on the volume and acidity of the aspirate,
classically considered dangerous above a volume of around twenty-five millilitres
and below a pH of around two and a half, and worsened by particulate material.
The aim of pharmacological aspiration prophylaxis is therefore to reduce the volume
and raise the pH of the gastric contents, and to promote gastric emptying,
in patients at increased risk.
Those at risk include the non-fasted and emergency patient, the pregnant,
the obese, those with reflux, hiatus hernia, gastroparesis as in diabetes,
and bowel obstruction.
So these drugs reduce the volume and acidity of gastric contents to mitigate the
risk and consequences of aspiration in the at-risk patient,
alongside technique such as rapid-sequence induction.
Describe the physiology of gastric acid secretion.
Gastric acid is secreted by the parietal cells of the gastric mucosa,
through the hydrogen-potassium ATPase — the proton pump — on their apical membrane,
which pumps hydrogen ions into the lumen in exchange for potassium.
The parietal cell is stimulated by three pathways converging to activate the pump:
histamine, released from local enterochromaffin-like cells and acting on H2
receptors, the dominant stimulus; gastrin, from antral G cells,
acting both directly and by releasing histamine; and acetylcholine,
from vagal stimulation, acting on muscarinic receptors.
Secretion occurs in cephalic, gastric and intestinal phases,
stimulated by the sight and thought of food, gastric distension and content,
and is inhibited by acid itself through somatostatin.
So acid is produced by the parietal-cell proton pump under histaminergic,
gastrin and cholinergic stimulation — which identifies the drug targets:
the H2 receptor, the proton pump, and the neutralisation of secreted acid.
Describe the antacids and the place of sodium citrate.
The antacids are bases that act directly in the stomach to neutralise acid already
secreted, raising the gastric pH rapidly but transiently.
They are of two kinds with an important distinction in anaesthesia.
The particulate antacids, containing aluminium, magnesium or calcium salts,
neutralise acid but, if themselves aspirated,
cause a particulate aspiration injury as harmful as acid,
so they are avoided as aspiration prophylaxis before anaesthesia.
The non-particulate antacid sodium citrate raises the gastric pH without this
particulate hazard, and it is used, classically in obstetric practice,
given shortly before a caesarean section to neutralise the existing acid,
complementing the slower-acting antisecretory drugs.
Its effect is immediate but short-lived. So the antacids neutralise existing acid;
the non-particulate sodium citrate is used for immediate aspiration prophylaxis,
especially in obstetrics, whereas particulate antacids are avoided because of the
danger of particulate aspiration.
Describe the H2-receptor antagonists.
The H2-receptor antagonists block the histamine H2 receptor on the parietal cell,
reducing the dominant stimulus to acid secretion,
so they reduce both the volume and the acidity of gastric secretions,
though they act over an hour or more so they must be given in advance and do not
neutralise acid already present.
They are used for aspiration prophylaxis,
given the evening before and on the morning of surgery in elective cases,
or intravenously in emergencies, and for reflux and peptic ulcer disease.
Ranitidine, long the standard, has been withdrawn in many countries because of
contamination with the carcinogen N-nitrosodimethylamine,
so famotidine is now commonly used.
Cimetidine inhibits cytochrome P450 enzymes, causing drug interactions,
and has anti-androgen effects, so it is little used.
So the H2 antagonists reduce gastric acid secretion for aspiration prophylaxis and
reflux, given in advance; famotidine has largely replaced the withdrawn ranitidine.
Describe the proton pump inhibitors.
The proton pump inhibitors — omeprazole, lansoprazole,
pantoprazole and others — are the most powerful acid-suppressing drugs.
They are prodrugs that accumulate in the acidic parietal cell and irreversibly
inhibit the hydrogen-potassium ATPase, the final common step of acid secretion,
so they profoundly reduce acid output; because they act on the pump itself,
their effect outlasts the drug and a sustained suppression develops over a few days
of dosing.
They are used for reflux, peptic ulcer disease,
the prevention of stress ulceration, and for aspiration prophylaxis,
given the night before and morning of surgery or intravenously.
Their long-term adverse effects, relevant in chronic users,
include an increased risk of enteric infection such as Clostridioides difficile and
pneumonia, hypomagnesaemia, vitamin B12 and iron malabsorption,
a small increase in fracture risk, and rebound hypersecretion on stopping.
So the proton pump inhibitors irreversibly block the proton pump for powerful,
sustained acid suppression, with recognised long-term risks.
Describe the prokinetic drugs.
The prokinetics increase gastrointestinal motility and gastric emptying,
reducing the residual gastric volume,
and they increase lower oesophageal sphincter tone.
Metoclopramide is the main agent: it is a dopamine D2 antagonist with additional
serotonin 5HT4 agonism, which promotes gastric emptying and acts as an antiemetic,
useful in aspiration prophylaxis and for nausea,
but its dopamine antagonism causes extrapyramidal effects — acute dystonic
reactions, particularly in young women and children,
and parkinsonism — limiting its dose and duration.
Domperidone is a peripheral D2 antagonist that does not cross the blood-brain
barrier, so it lacks the central extrapyramidal effects,
but it prolongs the QT interval.
Erythromycin, the antibiotic, is a motilin-receptor agonist and a potent gastric
prokinetic, used in some settings to promote emptying.
So the prokinetics, chiefly metoclopramide,
hasten gastric emptying and raise sphincter tone,
metoclopramide limited by extrapyramidal effects and domperidone by QT prolongation.
How would you provide aspiration prophylaxis for an elective and an emergency
at-risk patient?
I would tailor it to the urgency and risk.
For the elective patient at increased risk — for example significant reflux — I
would ensure appropriate fasting and give an antisecretory drug in advance:
a proton pump inhibitor or an H2 antagonist the night before and on the morning of
surgery, reducing the volume and acidity of gastric contents.
For the emergency or obstetric patient,
where there is no time for the slow antisecretory effect and a full stomach must be
assumed, I would combine measures: an intravenous H2 antagonist where time allows,
a prokinetic such as metoclopramide,
and immediately before induction the non-particulate antacid sodium citrate to
neutralise existing acid, together with a rapid-sequence induction with cricoid
pressure and a secured airway.
So elective prophylaxis uses advance antisecretory drugs,
and emergency or obstetric prophylaxis combines an antacid,
antisecretory and prokinetic drug with rapid-sequence induction.
What is the place of these drugs in the obstetric patient specifically?
The pregnant patient is at particular risk of aspiration — from the
progesterone-mediated reduction in lower oesophageal sphincter tone,
the raised intra-abdominal pressure of the gravid uterus,
and delayed gastric emptying in labour,
compounded by a higher incidence of difficult intubation — so aspiration
prophylaxis is routine for caesarean section under general anaesthesia.
The established regimen combines an H2 antagonist, given to reduce acid secretion,
with the non-particulate antacid sodium citrate immediately before induction to
neutralise the acid already present, and often a prokinetic such as metoclopramide;
ranitidine was traditionally used, with famotidine now substituted.
A rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure is performed.
For elective caesarean section oral antisecretory premedication is given beforehand.
So in obstetrics, aspiration prophylaxis combines an H2 antagonist and sodium
citrate, often with metoclopramide, and rapid-sequence induction,
reflecting the heightened aspiration risk of pregnancy.
What are the main adverse effects and interactions of these drugs?
Each group has characteristic concerns. The antacids are generally safe but
particulate antacids are hazardous if aspirated and can affect the absorption of
other drugs.
The H2 antagonists are well tolerated; cimetidine is the exception,
inhibiting cytochrome P450 and so raising the levels of drugs such as warfarin and
theophylline, and having anti-androgen effects.
The proton pump inhibitors have the long-term risks of enteric and respiratory
infection, hypomagnesaemia, B12 and iron malabsorption,
a small fracture risk and rebound hypersecretion,
and omeprazole inhibits the activation of clopidogrel.
The prokinetics: metoclopramide causes extrapyramidal reactions,
especially acute dystonia in the young, and is restricted in dose and duration;
domperidone prolongs the QT; erythromycin has its antibiotic effects and
interactions and also prolongs the QT.
So the key issues are particulate aspiration, cimetidine's enzyme inhibition,
the proton pump inhibitors' long-term and clopidogrel effects,
and the extrapyramidal and QT effects of the prokinetics.
Pull it together: how do you use these drugs rationally?
I would target the goals of reducing the volume and acidity of gastric contents and
promoting emptying in patients at increased risk of aspiration,
and treating reflux and ulcer disease.
For aspiration prophylaxis I would identify the at-risk patient — the non-fasted,
emergency, pregnant, obese, refluxing or gastroparetic — and choose the regimen by
urgency: advance antisecretory therapy with a proton pump inhibitor or H2
antagonist electively, and a combination of an H2 antagonist,
a prokinetic and the non-particulate antacid sodium citrate with rapid-sequence
induction in the emergency and obstetric setting.
I would avoid particulate antacids before anaesthesia,
use metoclopramide mindful of extrapyramidal effects,
and be aware of the proton pump inhibitors' long-term risks and interactions.
I would not rely on drugs alone but combine them with fasting and airway technique.
So rational use matches the regimen to the aspiration risk and urgency,
combined with fasting and rapid-sequence induction.
Describe the perioperative concern with the GLP-1 receptor agonists.
The glucagon-like-peptide-one receptor agonists — such as semaglutide and
liraglutide — used for diabetes and increasingly for weight loss,
have become an important new aspiration concern because one of their actions is to
delay gastric emptying.
This means that a patient taking one of these drugs may have a significant volume
of retained gastric content despite apparently adequate fasting,
increasing the risk of regurgitation and aspiration on induction.
Emerging guidance recommends considering withholding the drug before elective
surgery — for the longer-acting weekly agents,
potentially for a week or more — treating the patient as having a potential full
stomach if it has not been withheld or if there are symptoms of retained food,
considering gastric ultrasound, and applying aspiration precautions including
rapid-sequence induction.
So the GLP-1 agonists delay gastric emptying and so raise the aspiration risk,
prompting consideration of withholding them,
assessing residual gastric content and applying full-stomach precautions,
a current and evolving area of practice.
How can gastric contents be assessed at the bedside?
Gastric ultrasound has emerged as a useful bedside tool to assess the stomach when
the aspiration risk is uncertain — for example in the patient with unclear fasting,
with conditions delaying emptying such as diabetes or a GLP-1 agonist,
or in the emergency setting.
By scanning the gastric antrum, the operator can determine whether the stomach
contains clear fluid, thick fluid or solid,
and can estimate the gastric volume from the antral cross-sectional area,
helping to classify the stomach as empty or full and so to decide whether
full-stomach precautions and rapid-sequence induction are warranted.
It thus individualises the aspiration-risk assessment rather than relying on
fasting times alone.
So gastric ultrasound allows bedside assessment of the nature and volume of gastric
contents, refining the decision on aspiration precautions where the risk is
uncertain, an increasingly used technique.
Explain the second-messenger pathways of the parietal cell and where the drugs act.
The parietal cell integrates three stimuli through their second messengers to drive
the proton pump. Histamine, acting on the H2 receptor,
couples through a stimulatory G protein to adenylate cyclase, raising cyclic AMP,
the dominant pathway.
Acetylcholine, on muscarinic M3 receptors, and gastrin, on its receptor,
couple through pathways raising intracellular calcium.
These converge to activate the hydrogen-potassium ATPase, the proton pump,
on the apical membrane.
The drugs act at successive points:
the H2 antagonists block the dominant histaminergic stimulus,
reducing but not abolishing secretion since the other pathways remain;
the proton pump inhibitors block the final common pump,
giving the most profound suppression regardless of the stimulus;
and the antacids neutralise acid already secreted.
So histaminergic, cholinergic and gastrin stimuli converge through cyclic AMP and
calcium on the proton pump, and the drugs act at the H2 receptor, the pump,
or on secreted acid, explaining their relative potencies.
How is an acute dystonic reaction to metoclopramide recognised and treated?
An acute dystonic reaction is an extrapyramidal effect of the dopamine antagonism
of metoclopramide, occurring more commonly in young women and in children,
and after even a single dose.
It presents with the acute onset of involuntary,
sustained muscle contractions — oculogyric crisis with upward deviation of the
eyes, spasm of the face, jaw and neck with torticollis, trismus,
and sometimes alarming tongue protrusion or laryngeal spasm — which is distressing
and frightening but not usually dangerous,
though laryngeal involvement can threaten the airway.
It is recognised by this characteristic picture following the drug.
Treatment is to stop the drug and give an antimuscarinic such as procyclidine,
or an antihistamine, which rapidly relieves the dystonia, with reassurance.
So an acute dystonic reaction to metoclopramide presents with oculogyric crisis and
dystonic spasms of the head and neck, especially in the young,
treated by stopping the drug and giving procyclidine,
and avoiding metoclopramide thereafter.
Why must the antisecretory drugs be given in advance,
and how does this affect timing?
The antisecretory drugs — the H2 antagonists and proton pump inhibitors — reduce
the secretion of new acid but do not neutralise the acid already present in the
stomach, and they take time to act: the H2 antagonists over about an hour or more,
and the proton pump inhibitors developing their full effect over a few doses
because of the way they accumulate and irreversibly block the pump.
This means that, to be effective for aspiration prophylaxis,
they must be given in advance — typically the evening before and again on the
morning of surgery for an elective case — rather than immediately before induction.
When prophylaxis is needed immediately, as in the emergency or obstetric patient,
the fast-acting non-particulate antacid sodium citrate is added to neutralise the
existing acid.
So the antisecretory drugs require advance dosing because they act slowly and only
on new secretion, which is why immediate prophylaxis relies on adding sodium
citrate to neutralise acid already present.
What are the long-term safety concerns with proton pump inhibitors?
Although effective and widely used,
the proton pump inhibitors have a growing list of associations with long-term use
that counsel against unnecessary continuation.
By profoundly reducing gastric acid, they impair the barrier to ingested organisms,
increasing the risk of enteric infection such as Clostridioides difficile,
and are associated with an increased risk of pneumonia.
They impair the absorption of substances requiring acid — vitamin B12, iron,
and magnesium, the last causing hypomagnesaemia — and are associated with a small
increase in fracture risk, possibly through calcium absorption.
Stopping them can cause rebound acid hypersecretion.
Omeprazole inhibits the activation of clopidogrel, reducing its antiplatelet effect.
So the long-term concerns — enteric and respiratory infection,
malabsorption of B12, iron and magnesium, a small fracture risk,
rebound hypersecretion, and the clopidogrel interaction — mean these drugs should
be used at the lowest effective dose for the shortest necessary time.
Describe domperidone and the restrictions on its use.
Domperidone is a dopamine D2-receptor antagonist that acts as a prokinetic and
antiemetic by blocking dopamine peripherally and at the chemoreceptor trigger zone,
which lies outside the blood-brain barrier.
Its distinguishing feature is that it does not itself cross the blood-brain barrier
appreciably, so it largely avoids the central extrapyramidal effects that limit
metoclopramide, an advantage.
However, it has been found to prolong the QT interval and to be associated with
serious ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death,
particularly at higher doses, in the elderly,
and with other QT-prolonging drugs or electrolyte disturbance,
which has led to restrictions on its dose, duration and use,
with contraindications in cardiac disease and caution with interacting drugs.
So domperidone is a peripherally acting dopamine antagonist that avoids
extrapyramidal effects but is restricted because of QT prolongation and a risk of
serious arrhythmia, to be used at the lowest dose for the shortest time with
attention to cardiac risk.
What is the place of these drugs in treating reflux and peptic ulcer disease?
Beyond aspiration prophylaxis, these drugs are the mainstay of treating
acid-related disease.
In gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, antacids give symptomatic relief,
and the antisecretory drugs — proton pump inhibitors being the most effective —
heal oesophagitis and control symptoms.
In peptic ulcer disease, the proton pump inhibitors heal ulcers and, crucially,
where the ulcer is associated with Helicobacter pylori,
eradication of the organism with combined antibiotic and proton pump inhibitor
therapy cures the disease and prevents recurrence.
The proton pump inhibitors also prevent and treat the ulceration associated with
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and are used for stress ulcer prophylaxis in
the critically ill, and for the hypersecretion of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
So these drugs treat reflux and heal peptic ulcers,
with proton pump inhibitors central,
alongside Helicobacter eradication for ulcer disease and the prevention of
non-steroidal-related and stress ulceration.
How does obesity and diabetes increase aspiration risk,
and how does that change management?
Both increase the aspiration risk through delayed gastric emptying and other
mechanisms.
In obesity there is a higher prevalence of reflux and hiatus hernia,
raised intra-abdominal pressure, and often a larger residual gastric volume,
together with a greater likelihood of difficult airway management,
so the consequences of aspiration are more serious.
In diabetes, autonomic neuropathy causes gastroparesis,
delaying gastric emptying so that the stomach may not be empty despite fasting.
These factors lower the threshold for treating the patient as at risk:
applying pharmacological aspiration prophylaxis,
considering gastric ultrasound to assess the stomach,
and using a rapid-sequence induction with a secured airway and cricoid pressure,
with careful airway planning in the obese.
So obesity and diabetic gastroparesis delay gastric emptying and raise aspiration
risk, prompting aspiration prophylaxis,
assessment of gastric content and rapid-sequence induction,
with particular attention to the airway in the obese patient.
Summarise the rational, risk-based approach to these drugs.
I would use these drugs to reduce the volume and acidity of gastric contents and to
promote emptying in patients at increased risk of aspiration,
and to treat acid-related disease, in each case matching the regimen to the
situation.
For aspiration prophylaxis I would identify the at-risk patient — emergency,
pregnant, obese, refluxing, diabetic,
or on a GLP-1 agonist — assess the stomach where uncertain,
including by ultrasound, and choose: advance antisecretory therapy electively,
and a combination of an H2 antagonist,
a prokinetic and the non-particulate antacid sodium citrate with rapid-sequence
induction in the emergency or obstetric setting, avoiding particulate antacids.
I would respect the cautions — metoclopramide's extrapyramidal effects,
domperidone's QT prolongation, the proton pump inhibitors' long-term risks and
clopidogrel interaction, and cimetidine's enzyme inhibition — and combine drugs
with appropriate fasting and airway technique.
So my approach is risk-based, individualised,
and combines pharmacology with fasting and rapid-sequence induction.
Describe sucralfate and misoprostol.
These are mucosal protective agents acting differently from the acid suppressants.
Sucralfate is a complex of sucrose and aluminium that,
in the acid environment of the stomach, forms a viscous,
adherent paste that coats and protects ulcerated mucosa,
acting as a physical barrier and promoting healing,
without significantly altering gastric pH;
it is used in ulcer disease and stress-ulcer prophylaxis,
and because it does not raise gastric pH it has been considered to carry a lower
risk of the pneumonia associated with acid suppression.
Misoprostol is a synthetic prostaglandin analogue that both reduces acid secretion
and enhances mucosal defence, used to prevent the gastric ulceration caused by
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; it causes diarrhoea and, importantly,
stimulates uterine contraction, so it is contraindicated in pregnancy and is used
separately in obstetrics.
So sucralfate protects mucosa as a physical barrier without raising pH,
and misoprostol is a prostaglandin analogue protecting against
non-steroidal-induced ulcers but uterotonic and contraindicated in pregnancy.
What is the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome?
The Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a condition of pathological gastric acid
hypersecretion caused by a gastrin-secreting tumour, a gastrinoma,
usually of the pancreas or duodenum,
which may be sporadic or part of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type one syndrome.
The excessive gastrin drives the parietal cells to produce very large amounts of
acid, causing severe, multiple and refractory peptic ulcers,
often in unusual sites, with diarrhoea from the acid load.
It is diagnosed by a markedly raised fasting serum gastrin with a high gastric acid
output, and by localising the tumour.
Its acid hypersecretion is controlled with high-dose proton pump inhibitors,
the most powerful acid suppressants,
with definitive treatment by surgical removal of the tumour where possible.
So the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is gastrin-driven acid hypersecretion from a
gastrinoma causing refractory ulceration,
controlled by high-dose proton pump inhibitors and treated definitively by tumour
resection — the extreme of acid-related disease.
How do antacids interfere with the absorption of other drugs?
Antacids can impair the absorption of several other drugs through two main
mechanisms, which is clinically relevant.
First, by raising the gastric pH they alter the ionisation and dissolution of drugs
whose absorption depends on an acidic environment, reducing the absorption of,
for example, some antifungals and certain other weak bases.
Second, the polyvalent metal cations in particulate antacids — aluminium,
magnesium, calcium — form insoluble chelates with certain drugs,
notably the tetracycline and quinolone antibiotics, iron, and bisphosphonates,
markedly reducing their absorption.
The practical advice is to separate the administration of antacids from these
interacting drugs by a couple of hours.
So antacids reduce the absorption of other drugs by raising gastric pH and by
chelation of drugs such as tetracyclines, quinolones, iron and bisphosphonates,
managed by separating their administration in time — a common and examinable
interaction.
How do the H2 antagonists and proton pump inhibitors compare for aspiration
prophylaxis?
Both raise gastric pH and reduce volume, but they differ in degree and onset,
which informs the choice.
The proton pump inhibitors produce a more profound and sustained suppression of
acid by irreversibly blocking the final common pump,
but their full effect develops over a few doses,
so a single preoperative dose may be less reliable than expected,
and they are best given the night before and the morning of surgery.
The H2 antagonists are effective and act somewhat more quickly when given an hour
or more in advance, and have a long record in obstetric and other aspiration
prophylaxis.
In practice either is used for elective prophylaxis, given in advance;
neither neutralises acid already present,
so the fast-acting sodium citrate is added when immediate prophylaxis is needed.
So both reduce acid for prophylaxis,
the proton pump inhibitors more powerfully but needing repeated dosing,
the H2 antagonists reliably when given in advance,
with sodium citrate added for immediate effect.
Describe the relevant gastro-oesophageal sphincter physiology.
The barrier against the reflux and regurgitation of gastric contents is the lower
oesophageal sphincter, a zone of tonically contracted smooth muscle at the
gastro-oesophageal junction, supported by the crural diaphragm and the angle of His.
The barrier pressure is the difference between the lower oesophageal sphincter
pressure and the intragastric pressure; reflux occurs when this is overcome.
This barrier is weakened by many factors relevant to anaesthesia: pregnancy,
through progesterone and raised intra-abdominal pressure;
obesity and a hiatus hernia; and a number of drugs and the anaesthetic agents
themselves, with several anaesthetic drugs reducing sphincter tone.
Cricoid pressure mechanically occludes the oesophagus to prevent regurgitation
during induction.
So the lower oesophageal sphincter and the barrier pressure protect against
regurgitation, weakened by pregnancy, obesity, hiatus hernia and anaesthetic drugs,
which is why aspiration risk is increased in these states and why mechanical
measures such as cricoid pressure are added at induction.
What is the role of the prokinetics' contraindication in obstruction,
and of nasogastric decompression?
An important caution is that the prokinetics,
which act by stimulating gastrointestinal motility,
are contraindicated where there is a mechanical bowel obstruction or perforation,
because stimulating contraction against an obstruction is ineffective and
potentially harmful, risking increased pain or perforation;
in obstruction the stomach and bowel are instead decompressed.
Nasogastric decompression — passing a nasogastric tube to aspirate the gastric
contents — is the mechanical means of emptying the stomach in obstruction and
ileus, reducing the volume available for regurgitation and aspiration,
and is an important adjunct to pharmacological measures in the at-risk emergency
patient, though a tube does not guarantee an empty stomach and rapid-sequence
induction is still required.
So prokinetics are contraindicated in mechanical obstruction,
where nasogastric decompression is used instead to empty the stomach,
a mechanical complement to the pharmacological reduction of aspiration risk.
Define the at-risk ‘full stomach’ and outline the drugs of rapid-sequence induction.
The patient is regarded as having a full stomach, and so at risk of aspiration,
when fasting cannot be assured or gastric emptying is delayed — the emergency and
non-fasted patient, the patient in pain or given opioids, the pregnant,
the patient with bowel obstruction, significant reflux,
or delayed emptying from diabetes or a GLP-1 agonist.
Such a patient receives a rapid-sequence induction to secure the airway quickly and
minimise the period of risk: preoxygenation,
then the near-simultaneous administration of a rapidly acting induction agent and a
rapidly acting neuromuscular blocker — classically suxamethonium,
or high-dose rocuronium, which has the advantage of reversibility with sugammadex —
with cricoid pressure, and prompt intubation.
So the full stomach is the patient in whom an empty stomach cannot be assured,
managed by rapid-sequence induction with preoxygenation,
a rapid induction agent and a rapid neuromuscular blocker with cricoid pressure —
the technique these drugs support.
Describe the clopidogrel–proton pump inhibitor interaction in detail.
Clopidogrel is a prodrug requiring activation by the hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme
system, particularly the isoenzyme two-C-nineteen,
to its active antiplatelet metabolite.
Some proton pump inhibitors, notably omeprazole and esomeprazole,
inhibit this isoenzyme, which can reduce the activation of clopidogrel and so its
antiplatelet effect, a pharmacokinetic interaction of concern given that
clopidogrel is often co-prescribed with a proton pump inhibitor to protect the
stomach from the bleeding risk of dual antiplatelet therapy.
The clinical significance has been debated,
but the pragmatic response is to use a proton pump inhibitor with less inhibition
of the isoenzyme — pantoprazole, for example — in patients on clopidogrel,
or to separate dosing, where gastric protection is needed.
So omeprazole reduces the activation of clopidogrel by inhibiting cytochrome P450
two-C-nineteen, potentially diminishing its antiplatelet effect,
managed by choosing a less inhibitory proton pump inhibitor such as pantoprazole —
a clinically relevant interaction.
What are the considerations in the bariatric and the obstetric surgical patient?
Both groups are at heightened aspiration risk warranting particular attention to
these drugs.
The obese and bariatric patient has a higher prevalence of reflux and hiatus
hernia, raised intra-abdominal pressure and often a larger residual gastric volume,
with a greater chance of difficult airway management,
so aspiration prophylaxis with antisecretory drugs,
consideration of gastric assessment,
and a rapid-sequence induction are appropriate,
alongside careful airway and positioning planning.
The obstetric patient has the reduced sphincter tone and delayed emptying of
pregnancy and a higher incidence of difficult intubation,
so receives the established prophylaxis of an H2 antagonist and sodium citrate,
often with metoclopramide, and rapid-sequence induction for general anaesthesia.
So both the bariatric and the obstetric patient are treated as at high aspiration
risk, with antisecretory and antacid prophylaxis, prokinetics where appropriate,
and rapid-sequence induction, reflecting their delayed emptying,
reflux and airway challenges.
If aspiration occurs, how is it managed?
Despite prophylaxis, aspiration may occur,
and its management is prompt and supportive.
On recognising regurgitation or aspiration — by seeing gastric content in the
pharynx or signs of airway soiling, hypoxia,
wheeze or new infiltrates — the immediate steps are to position the patient
head-down and lateral if possible, apply suction to the airway,
and secure the airway by intubation,
with suction of the trachea before positive-pressure ventilation if feasible to
limit distal spread.
Oxygenation and ventilation are supported,
with positive end-expiratory pressure as needed,
and the patient is observed for the development of aspiration pneumonitis.
Treatment thereafter is supportive — oxygen and ventilatory support — with
antibiotics reserved for established infection rather than given routinely,
and corticosteroids not recommended.
So aspiration is managed by immediate airway protection and suction,
supportive oxygenation and ventilation, and observation,
with antibiotics only for established infection — the response when prophylaxis
fails.
How do the three phases of gastric secretion inform the timing of fasting and
prophylaxis?
Gastric acid secretion occurs in three phases that help explain fasting and
prophylaxis.
The cephalic phase, triggered by the sight, smell,
thought and taste of food through vagal stimulation,
accounts for a substantial part of the secretory response and begins before food is
even eaten.
The gastric phase, the largest, is stimulated by the arrival and distension of food
and by its protein content, through gastrin and local reflexes.
The intestinal phase, as chyme enters the duodenum,
has both stimulatory and predominantly inhibitory components.
Fasting reduces the gastric and intestinal phases by ensuring an empty stomach,
but residual acid and the cephalic response remain,
which is why antisecretory drugs are added in the at-risk patient and why an empty
stomach is not an acid-free stomach.
So the cephalic, gastric and intestinal phases mean that fasting reduces but does
not abolish acid, the cephalic phase and residual acid persisting,
which is the rationale for combining fasting with antisecretory and antacid
prophylaxis.
What is the controversy surrounding cricoid pressure?
Cricoid pressure — the application of pressure on the cricoid cartilage to occlude
the oesophagus against the vertebral body during rapid-sequence induction — has
long been standard to prevent regurgitation and aspiration,
but it has become controversial.
Proponents hold that it reduces the risk of passive regurgitation reaching the
pharynx.
Critics point to limited high-quality evidence of benefit,
to the possibility that incorrectly or excessively applied pressure can distort the
airway and worsen the laryngoscopic view and mask ventilation,
can reduce lower oesophageal sphincter tone,
and may not reliably occlude the oesophagus, which is often laterally displaced.
The pragmatic position is that cricoid pressure is still widely used in
rapid-sequence induction but should be released if it impedes airway management,
applied with correct force, and not regarded as infallible.
So cricoid pressure remains a common but debated component of aspiration
prevention, of uncertain proven benefit and potential to hinder the airway,
to be applied correctly and released if it impairs intubation or ventilation.
How does erythromycin act as a prokinetic, and when is it used?
Erythromycin, although primarily a macrolide antibiotic,
is a potent gastric prokinetic because it is an agonist at the motilin receptor on
gastrointestinal smooth muscle; motilin is the hormone that initiates the migrating
motor complex, the pattern of contractions that sweeps the stomach and small bowel
in the fasting state.
By stimulating these receptors, erythromycin powerfully accelerates gastric
emptying.
It is used clinically to promote gastric emptying in gastroparesis and feed
intolerance, particularly in the critically ill where enteral feeding is impaired,
and sometimes to clear the stomach of blood before endoscopy in upper
gastrointestinal bleeding.
Its drawbacks are tachyphylaxis with continued use,
its antibiotic effects and the consequent concern about resistance,
and QT prolongation.
So erythromycin acts as a prokinetic by agonism at the motilin receptor,
accelerating gastric emptying, used for gastroparesis and feed intolerance and
before endoscopy in bleeding, limited by tachyphylaxis,
its antibiotic nature and QT prolongation.
Give a final synthesis of the anaesthetist's approach to aspiration risk.
My approach integrates assessment, fasting, pharmacology and technique.
I would assess every patient's aspiration risk from the history, the urgency,
and conditions delaying emptying — emergency, pregnancy, obesity, reflux, diabetes,
bowel obstruction, opioids and the GLP-1 agonists — using gastric ultrasound where
the risk is uncertain.
I would apply appropriate fasting by the two-four-six rule for the elective fasted
patient.
For the at-risk patient I would add pharmacological prophylaxis matched to urgency
— advance antisecretory therapy electively, and an H2 antagonist,
a prokinetic and the non-particulate antacid sodium citrate with rapid-sequence
induction in the emergency and obstetric setting — avoiding particulate antacids
and respecting drug cautions.
I would secure the airway promptly, use cricoid pressure judiciously,
and be prepared to manage aspiration if it occurs.
So the anaesthetist's approach to aspiration risk is to assess, fast appropriately,
add pharmacological prophylaxis by urgency,
and combine this with sound airway technique — drugs being one part of a layered
defence.
Thank you. That was a thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Aspiration of gastric contents causes Mendelson's syndrome,
the risk relating to volume (>~25 mL), acidity (pH <~2.5) and particulate matter;
the goal of prophylaxis is to reduce volume and acidity and promote emptying in
at-risk patients (emergency, pregnant, obese, reflux, gastroparesis).
Second, Gastric acid is secreted by the parietal-cell proton pump (H/K-ATPase)
under histamine (H2, dominant), gastrin and cholinergic stimulation — giving the
drug targets: H2 receptor, the pump, and neutralisation of secreted acid.
Third, Non-particulate sodium citrate neutralises existing acid immediately (used
in obstetrics); particulate antacids are avoided before anaesthesia (particulate
aspiration is harmful); H2 antagonists (famotidine;
ranitidine withdrawn for NDMA) and proton pump inhibitors reduce secretion but must
be given in advance.
Fourth, Prokinetics (metoclopramide — D2 antagonist + 5HT4 agonist) hasten gastric
emptying and raise sphincter tone but cause extrapyramidal/dystonic reactions
(especially young women, children);
domperidone avoids central effects but prolongs the QT.
Fifth, Emergency/obstetric prophylaxis combines an H2 antagonist,
a prokinetic and sodium citrate with rapid-sequence induction and cricoid pressure;
note cimetidine's P450 inhibition, omeprazole-clopidogrel interaction,
and the long-term risks of proton pump inhibitors.
Thank you. That concludes the station.